Graduate Research Consultation Project
======================================

10. Quoted data and user-defined functions
------------------------------------------

Our program currently treats all input as a program and tries to evaluate
almost everything (except for some arguments of special functions).  To write
literal data in our programs, such as literal symbol names or lists, we need a
way to prevent that data from being evaluated as a program.

Add a special function "quote" that accepts one argument.  When evaluated

    (quote data)

returns the data (which can be any value) without evaluating it.  Your program
should now be able to accept the following expressions:

    input			output
    =====			======
    (quote 42)			42
    (quote (1 (2) 3))		(1 (2) 3)

Writing "(quote ...)" is a bit tedious.  Modify read() so that if the input
character is a single quote "'" followed by any value "x" then the result of
reading will be the list "(quote x)".  Verify that you get the following
results, equivalent to the above:

    input			output
    =====			======
    '42				42
    ' (1 (2) 3)			(1 (2) 3)
    ''hello  			(quote hello)

Recall from earlier that our function representation comes from the
mathematical notation used in the Lambda Calculus.  The list

    (lambda (...parameters...) ...expressions...)

represents a function that evaluates its expressions when called.  A simple
example of this might be:

    (lambda () 42)

which is a function with no parameters whose result is always 42.  We would
like our program to be able to call that function like this:

    input			output			note
    =====			======			====
    '(lambda () 42)		(lambda () 42)		a function
    ('(lambda () 42))		42	   		a function call

Our apply() function already checks for "func" being one of the symbols naming
a normal function such as "+" or "<".  Extend apply() so that it also checks
for "func" being a list whose first element is the symbol "lambda".  In that
case apply() should evaluate the third element of "func" as an expression and
return the result.  Verify that the above example now works.

We still cannot store a function in a variable and then call it using its
symbolic name.  This is because neither eval() nor apply() ever evaluate the
function, which is necessary to convert a symbol into its value.

If apply() does not recognise the "func" as a built-in normal function (such as
arithmetic) or a list containing a user-defined "lambda" function then it
should evaluate "func" as an expression and then call itself recursively to try
apply the result to the same list of arguments (which have already been
evaluated in eval()).  Make this change and then verify that:

    input				output
    =====				======
    (define f '(lambda () 42))		(lambda () 42)
    (f)					3

We can now implement parameter passing and local variables.

First, if you have not already done it, modify eval(oop exp) so that the
association list holding the variable names and values is passed as a second
argument "env" (short for 'environment').  When evaluating a symbol, search
"env" for an association (instead of searching "globals").  In main() you will
have to call "eval(exp, globals)" to evaluate each 'top-level' expression in
the context of the global variables.  Note that you will also have to modify
evlist() and apply() to pass "env" to them so that they can properly call
eval() recursively.  (Other than main(), the only place that still refers
directly to "globals" should be the implementation of the special function
"define".)  Verify that the above example still works properly.

To implement parameter passing and local variables in apply() we have to modify
"env" before evaluating the expression part of a "lambda" function.  In the
function call

    ('(lambda (x y) (* x y)) 6 7)

apply() is called with:

    func = (lambda (x y) (* x y))
    args = (6 7)
    env  = (... all the global variable associations ...)

The list of parameter names is the second element of "func".  We will add as
many "(parameter-name . argument-value)" associations to the front of "env" as
there are parameter names in the second element of the "lambda" function list.
To do this a function

    pairlist(oop names, oop values, oop tail)

will be helpful.  "names" is a list of symbols (e.g., the parameter names list
that is the second element in a "lambda" function), "values" is a list of
values (e.g., the evaluated arguments passed to apply() in "args"), and "tail"
is the original association list that we are adding to (at its front) passed to
apply() as "env".  For example, liberally mixing C and list notation:

    pairlist( '(a b c), '(1 2 3), '((d . 4) (e . 5)) )
    => ((a . 1) (b . 2) (c . 3) (d . 4) (e . 5))

One way to do this, in pseudo-code, would be:

    pairlist(names, values, tail) =
        if names is empty then return tail
	let ass = newCell(first element of names, first element of values)
	let names2 = names with the first element removed (the d part of names)
	let values2 = values with the first element removed (the d part of values)
	return newCell(ass, pairlist(names2, values2, tail))

Verify that:

    input				output
    =====				======
    ('(lambda (x) x) 42)		42
    ('(lambda (x y) (* x y)) 6 7)	42
    (define less
     '(lambda (x y)
        (if (< x y) 'yes 'no)))		(lambda (x y) (if (< x y) 'yes 'no))
    (less 3 4)				yes
    (less 4 4)				no
    (less 5 4)				no

Writing the quote "'" in front of a "lambda" function list is tedious.  Make
"lambda" be a special function that returns the expression it is part of (the
original "exp" passed to eval()) without evaluating anything.  Verify that:

    input				output
    =====				======
    (define dbl (lambda (x) (+ x x)))	(lambda (x) (+ x x))
    (dbl 21)				42

Finally, verify that

    input					output
    =====					======
    (define factorial
     '(lambda (n)
        (if (< n 2)
            1
            (* n (factorial (- n 1))))))	=> (lambda (n) (if (< n 2) 1 (* n (factorial (- n 1)))))

    (factorial 5)				=> 120

which is the result that we originally set out to obtain.
'
================================================================

Appendix: challenges and further exploration
--------------------------------------------

You now have a fully functional programming language in a couple hundred lines
of code.  Its simplicity, and the fact that programs are represented as data,
makes it a powerful vehicle for experiments with program representation,
semantics, and programming paradigms.  Here are some fun things you might like
to try:

† Allow multiple expressions in a (lambda (...) ...) function and evaluate them
  left-to-right when it is called.  The result of calling the function should
  be the value of the last expression evaluated in its body.

† Add comments to the language.  read() should treat a semicolon ';' and all
  the characters following it on the same line a spaces.
  
  ??? in read() / nextchar()
  it is ok or not?
  $(print ;)

† Add a normal function (print ...) that prints all its arguments separated by
  spaces.
  (print args)

† Add a normal function (println ...) that prints all its arguments separated
  by spaces and then a final newline.
  (println args)

< 0. symbol object >
- Optimise variables by storing the global value of a variable directly in the
  Symbol object that names it.  
  
  Use the "environment" association list only for storing local variables (function parameters).


† Add a special function "while" that repeats some expression(s) as long as a
  condition is true.

    (while condition expressions...)

† Add a special function "let" that introduces local variables.  The form

    (let ((name1 value1)
          (name2 value2)
	  ...)
      expressions...)

  will evaluate each of the valueN expressions to produce N results, then each
  corresponding nameN is associated with its valueN by adding a Cell to the
  front of the environment.  Then the expressions are evaluated in the new
  environment.  The result is the value of the last expression evaluated.

† Add a special function "setq" that changes the value of an existing local or
  global variable.

    (setq symbol exp)	=> search the current environment for symbol (not
    	  	 	   evaluated), set its value to exp (evaluated), and
			   return exp; generate an error if symbol is not in
			   the current environment

  Print the first ten non-negative integers like this:

    (define x 0)
    (while (< x 10) (println x) (setq x (+ 1 x)))


< 1. write prog in .txt>
- Add some constructor and accessor functions to your language so that you can
  use all the built-in types properly.  For example:

    (atom? x)			=> nil if x is a Cell, otherwise 't
    (integer? x)		=> 't if x is an integer, otherwise nil
    (symbol? x)			=> 't if x is a symbol, otherwise nil
    (cell? x)			=> 't if x is a Cell, otherwise nil
    (cons a d)			=> a new cell with given a and d parts
    (list a b c d ...)		=> the list (a b c d ...)
    (car x)                     => the head of the list x, or nil
    (cdr x)                     => the tail of the list x, or nil
    (set-car x y)		=> set the a part of Cell x to y
    (set-cdr x y)		=> set the d part of Cell x to y
    (eq? x y)			=> 't if x and y are the same object

  ??? It is OK that I write func used for .txt code in main code .c.
  such as car cdr...



< 2. eval, apply .....>
- Write the entire interpreter (eval, apply, and associated functions evlist,
  pairlist, etc.) as user-defined functions in your language.  Measure how much
  more slowly your "userland" interpreter performs compared to the C
  implementation.  You should be able to do something like this

    (eval '(define f (lambda (n)
                       (if (< 2 n)
		           1
			   (* n (f (- n 1)))))))
    (eval '(f 5))

  to produce the answer "120".

  ??? where I wirte them in.
  which .txt / .C



< 3. eval & apply >
- Add normal functions (eval x) and (apply fn args) to your language that
  evaluate expressions and call functions using the compiled C versions of
  those functions.

  ??? where i should wirite (eval x) and (apply fn args).
  which .txt / .c



< 4. syntax table>
- Implement basic meta programming.  Create a 'syntax table', an association
  list of symbols whose values are functions.  In the read() function, when a
  list L has been read and its first element S is a symbol, look up S in the
  syntax table.  If S is not found, return L as-is. 

  If S is found, apply its
  value F (which should be a function) to L and return the result F(L) instead
  of the original list L.  

  This mechanism will allow you to create "macros" in
  your language, functions that manipulate the syntactic structure of programs
  as they are being read.

  syntaxTable <- function list ((s f) (s f) ...)???
  list: L
  -> its first element: S    *symbol
  if S in syntaxTable -> apply its value F (which should be a function) to L and return the result F(L) instead of the original list L.  
  else -> L

  

† Implement a special function "quasiquote" that behaves like "quote" with one
  difference: it makes a copy of its argument and looks for elements that are
  lists of the form "(unquote x)".  Any element with that form is replaced by
  the result of evaluating "x".  You can then create data structures with
  computed contents, like this:

    (quasiquote (1 (+ 2 3) (unquote (+ 4 5)) (+ 6 7)))
    => (1 (+ 2 3) 9 (+ 6 7))

  In the read() function give quasi-quote and unquote special character

    `foo   ==  (quasiquote foo)
    ,foo   ==  (unquote foo)

  so that:

    `(1 (+ 2 3) ,(+ 4 5) (+ 6 7))	=> (1 (+ 2 3) 9 (+ 6 7))

† Implement "unquote-splicing" which is like "unquote" except that it can only
  appear in a list and must result in a list when evaluated.  It then inserts
  its result's elements into the enclosing list, like this:

    (list 2 3 4)				=> (2 3 4)
    `(1 (unquote (list 2 3 4)) 5)		=> (1 (2 3 4) 5)
    `(1 (unquote-splicing (list 2 3 4)) 5)	=> (1 2 3 4 5)

  In the read() function, make ",@x" generate the list "(unquote-splicing x)",
  so that you can write the previous example as:

    `(1 ,@(list 2 3 4) 5)			=> (1 2 3 4 5)

† Use the syntax table, quasiquote, unquote, and unquote-splicing to implement
  the macro

    (cond (c1 v1) (c2 v2) ... (cn vn))

  which evaluates each condition "cx" until one of them "cn" has a non-nil
  result, then it evaluates the corresponding "vn" and returns that as the
  overall result, for example:

    (define bit
      (lambda (b)
        (cond
      	  ((= x 0)    'zero)
      	  ((= x 1)    'one)
      	  ('t         'non-binary))))

    (bit 0)		=> zero
    (bit 1)		=> one
    (bit 2)		=> non-binary

  One way to implement this is to convert the "(cond ...)" form into a series
  of nested "if"s using a recursive helper function that operates in a similar
  way to the pairlist() function.

† Implement a macro

    (let ((n1 v1) (n2 v2) ...) e1 e2 ...)

  that evaluates all the values "vx" and then assigns them to local variables
  called "nx" before evaluating the expressions "ex" and returning the value of
  the last "ex" as its result.  This is actually quite easy, by transforming
  the above form into:

    ((lambda (n1 n2 ...) e1 e2 ...) v1 v2 ...)

  For example, you would transform

    (let ((x 3)
          (y 4))
      (+ x y))

  into:

    ((lambda (x y) (+ x y)) 3 4)
